Okay,
this is an interview with Jim Ball of Vista
Chemicals by Kelly Gamblin. Do you agree to let A&M
Archives have the results of this interview? Yes,
I do. Thank you. My first question is, what was your
date of birth and where were you born? February
27th, 1943, and I was born in Bramer, Missouri. And
what is your present age? 47. How did you decide to
go into the armed services? Well, it was a matter of
the fact that I came from the Midwest, and it was
always part of the ethic when I was growing up, is
that young men would go into service,
particularly if their country was at war.
At the time that I was starting to deal with this, it
was early in the Vietnam conflict in 1965, let's
say. And by the time I graduated in 1966, both the
sort of support from
myself within and from my friends was that we
should go in, most of us. And in addition to that, I
was going to get drafted in any case. So you had
those things happen at the same time. So I
ultimately did go in the Army then, but
volunteered just shortly before the draft. OK.
Which branch of the armed services did you join? In
the Army. OK. What was your rank? Well, I went in as
an enlisted man, and then went through the officer
candidate school program. And I was a first
lieutenant when I got out of the service. Okay, now
as a first lieutenant, what was your job
specifically in the field? In Vietnam was, first
of all, I was an infantry platoon leader with the
First Air Cavalry Division. And then I did that for
the first six months, roughly. And then for the
last six months, I was an air operations officer
for my battalion. Okay. So you entered Vietnam
shortly after high school graduation? After
college. Oh, after college. Okay, so how old were
you exactly? I've been, let's see, would have been
24,
I guess, when I went to Vietnam. Okay, I see. So you
thought it was your duty to go over there and help?
Well, in the early days, before I joined the
service, I thought it was my duty. And then- After I
got involved in the Army and got caught up in the
program and the training and so forth, I was very
successful in the Army. And I was in the state side
for nearly two years. And I ended up being in the
infantry school. And I was a tactical officer in
the infantry school. So I was very much involved in
teaching other people and training and how to
fight and so forth. And so by the time I went to
Vietnam, I not only felt it was my duty, which I did,
Vietnam was becoming more controversial by then,
1968, but still we didn't have the amount of
controversy in 1968 as we had starting after the
Tet Offensive, really, in 68. We didn't have as
much controversy, so I did go, I guess, a
combination of feeling it was a duty And also, I was
trained to go. It was something I was doing. Well,
when you actually found out, I mean, you got your
notice that you were going to be shipped off to
Vietnam, I mean, were you, was it a combination of
excitement or fear or exactly how did you feel
emotionally about going? Well, first of all, I
volunteered to go to Vietnam. I volunteered two
different times, as a matter of fact, and could not
get released from my current assignment to go.
until I had completed that. And so then I went as a
matter of due course because it was just expected
after the one-year assignment in Fort Benning I
was on in infantry school. So it was more a matter of
just kind of filling out something that was a plan
for a long period of time. But certainly, sure,
excitement, some fear, obviously, and so on. OK.
I've been told that Vietnam is a beautiful
country. I was just wondering, when you finally
arrived there, what was your initial impression
of, say, the country, the people, their kind of
culture? What did you feel about them? Well,
Vietnam looks like a lot of Southeast Asia. And
there are parts of it that are scenic. I think they
would be primarily along the coastline and in the
mountains. I saw almost none of the coastline. Of
course, when I first arrived, if that's what
you're asking, I landed on K,
I guess it was. And from there, We went out to the
field right away, and the particular area we were
in was not very attractive. And then we worked in
the coastal plains for a while, and that area was
not particularly attractive either. But then
after about a month or so, we went into the
mountains in a jungle mountain setting while it
was attractive, if you will.
When you arrived in Vietnam, what did you feel was
your specific purpose there? as a person, and what
were you doing for your country? Well, I was there
as an infantry officer, so my job was to organize
and lead my men to close with and destroy the enemy.
So by then, they were already operating on search
and destroy missions by this time? Search and
destroy is only a narrow definition of a broad kind
of tactics. And certainly those tactics were well
established long before that. The only reason
that once you get past the phase, for instance, in
something like Vietnam where the role of the
military is to train others, then the mission in a
war is to do exactly that in one way or another,
search and destroy. Okay. Did you think you could
win the war? Yes, yeah. Okay. When you first went
over there, was it? the kind of idea that you could
win it quickly without any problems? No, no, by no
means. I landed in May of 68, and by that time we'd
been in Vietnam already for three years. By virtue
of being in the infantry school in Fort Benning and
with lots of returning soldiers
from Vietnam, lots of firsthand stories as to what
the problems were in fighting the war. Our
training was, we were constantly trying to update
our training to be current with the situation and
be realistic in the situation. So there was never,
it should never have been any expectation on the
part of people who were trained that there was
going to be a fast or easy type of conversation. Did
you ever get to the point where you almost thought,
this is impossible, this is never going to work?
Oh, yes, sure. You have ups and downs in those kinds
of things. Right. I mean, part of those doubts
could only come about as you experienced
different kinds of events that happened during
the period. For instance,
in the first part of my tour, we operated in the I
Corps. That's the northern part of South Vietnam.
And we're working along in the mountains along
close to the Asha Valley. And that area.
Had been a very hot area in the early part of 1968.
And by the early fall of 1968 was actually starting
to calm down. We were running into much less
resistance.
And we. Picked up. And on very short order, in less
than 24 hours, we moved the whole division south to
work along the Cambodian border. And we were going
into an area which basically no large-scale
friendly allied or just friendly forces had
operated since the beginning of the Vietnam
conflict. It had been no man's land for all that
period of time. And we were staging on
a little remote airstrip to go into a combat
assault by helicopter into an area that was just a
few thousand meters from the Cambodian border.
And what virtually happened is that we were there,
and helicopters were coming in to pick us up. And
one of my men had a transistor radio on, and Lyndon
Johnson announced that we were going to cease the
bombing in North Vietnam. So at times like that,
some despair would set in and say, you know, this is
never going to work if we're not going to be willing
to take this and fight it to its fullest extent. One
of the things that we've discussed in this class to
a pretty big extent was how
were you going to win the hearts and minds of the
Vietnamese people? What exactly did that mean to
you? Well, first of all, I have virtually no
personal experience with it. because I was
only exposed to the Vietnamese civilian
population a very few times. But the slogan meant,
I think in general, is that we will go in and try to
show the Vietnamese people that they can protect
themselves, first of all, and that we would be
willing to help them, not only protect
themselves, but to grow as a country, grow
economically, and grow politically.
And our missions there then were to bolster the
Army, to provide medical care, to provide, in
fact, some agricultural training was done in some
areas. to win the support of the people and to win,
you know, literally their hearts. That means the
support part of it. And the minds is that they were,
on an intellectual basis, we would identify with
the Americans as friendly and with democracy as a
way of government that they should be pursuing. We
talked also about how Arvin was hard to work with,
partly because they were not as at least according
to a professor, they were not nearly as skilled as
the American troops, even though they had
American training. Did you have problems, or did
you even work with them to start with? I never, so I
can't really comment.
I have some doubts about those reports, though,
that they were not as skilled as American
soldiers. I think the problem was was more likely
to be is that large parts of the Vietnamese army was
corrupt and the soldiers perceived this to be
true, and so therefore they weren't motivated to
fight. It wasn't a matter of skill per se. MS. Do you
happen to know? I don't know no more about that than
people who read about it. I mean, that's all I know.
You don't know anything about their desertion
rates? I don't, no. That's basically hearsay on
your part? Yeah, more than the things that you read
from others. We talked about also about how during
the later part of the war years when it was getting
to be very controversial that some of the troops
even decided that they weren't going to fight.
U.S. troops. That they just had enough. Did you
ever encounter any problems in this? I think that
phenomenon really... started to happen in the
early 70s. That's when we started to hear about
those reports in some major way. And we heard about
the fraggings, for instance.
In any war, in any combat situation, you're going
to have a few people who, for one reason or another,
will refuse to fight. I personally, within my
platoon, only had one person, I would say, that
that would really apply to for sure. I mean, some
others who were very ineffective in fighting, but
that was more from just an absolute fear than
anything else. So it wasn't a problem. And also,
one of the things that I believe is true is when you
hear or read about Vietnam one has to distinguish
carefully between what time period it was and also
what sort of unit that one was talking about.
Another aspect of the same thing, and I'll make the
same observation as on drugs, is in the later part
of the Vietnam conflict, we heard an awful lot
about the use of drugs by soldiers, and that was
obviously true from things that have happened
since then, reports we've heard since then. But I
think both in the case of of the use of drugs and in
things like morale problems, it was a function
often of the units that people were in as well. And
the 1st Air Cav was a reasonably well-run unit, and
it was still considered to be an elite type of
operation. It was an air operations. It and the
101st Airborne were the only two in Vietnam. A
large number of the officers were volunteer,
volunteered wanting to do that specific thing.
And so we didn't have the problems, I don't think.
Well, I should make one of the observations. That
is, we were in the field all the time. If you're in
the field and you didn't have access to the
civilian population, you didn't have access to
drugs. Now, my impression is that the combination
of drugs being late in the war kind of led and and
being part of a so-so unit that didn't have very
good morale led to a lot of those combat desertions
that you're talking about. What were your
feelings about the students who were protesting
back in the States, the anti-war movement? Well,
I'm sure that
a large number of those students were motivated
because they really believed what we were doing
was unjust. But the truth of the matter is most of
them were really only motivated to go out and do
very much about demonstrating because they were
also fearful for their own personal safety of
being involved in something that they weren't
involved in. So, I mean, in many cases, I can
remember having thoughts is that I believe that
some of these people believe in what they're
doing. But frequently, why I believe that they
really didn't want to go themselves was the main
issue they were working on. Right. I think you're
right. Okay. Looking back now, do you think
Vietnam could be won? Could it have been won? Well,
it certainly, yes, it could have been won, but only
by an effort that involved
probably ultimately an invasion of North
Vietnam, but at least a more extensive bombing. of
north vietnam yeah okay do you think it was ever
well let me put it this way do you think it would have
been helpful for the u.s to go into north vietnam i
mean literally with troops and all well if would
have been helpful in the narrow sense of winning
the war yes but in what was good for the united
states no because the the the loss of life would
have been enormous unless you basically
decimated the North Vietnamese people by bombing
ahead of time and that would have been a tragedy as
well because I think the larger lesson in Vietnam
is that it ultimately probably didn't mean as much
as we thought it did in 1965. And so anything that we
might have done to have made it a larger scale
operation probably wouldn't have been worth it. I
mean after all in Vietnam our Our enemies were,
first of all, the North Vietnamese, and they were
being supported by the Chinese and by the
Russians. Well, the North Vietnamese don't
really matter today as far as being someone who is
not a friend and supporter of the United States.
And the Chinese, the relationships are much
better. Tiananmen Square of last year
notwithstanding, those will again improve, I
believe. and obviously things are improving with
the Russians.
So as time has shown, it's just that Vietnam wasn't
worth it at the cost it did have, and so it certainly
wouldn't have been worth it to do anymore. Well, if
there had been an invasion of North Vietnam of
ground troops, was there a real threat of the
Chinese or Moscow intervening into the war, do you
think? I don't think the Russians would have.
And on the Chinese,
it's difficult to say. The precedent had been set,
of course, in Korea for them to have done so. And the
Chinese in those days, I think, were much more
prone to do so, but they were also tied up in their
own cultural revolution at the time, too. I don't
know. I mean, I don't think there is any clear
coming, but it would have been a big risk. It would
have been a risk for sure because most of the
support, the direct support the North Vietnamese
were getting in those days in terms of materiel and
advisors, I think, were coming from China. Okay.
So when did you leave Vietnam to come back to the
States? In May of 69. Okay. And did you have any
problems fitting back into civilian life? No. OK,
so how did you get involved with Vista Chemicals?
Well, let's see. I came back and decided I wasn't
quite ready yet to go to work. And so I went to
graduate school for a semester. But my plan all the
time was that I would use that period of time while I
was in graduate school to start interviewing,
looking for jobs. And I did so, interviewed with a
number of companies, And I had a good friend
working for Conoco, which is the predecessor to
Vista. And the combination of knowing some people
there and having a very favorable interview and
liking what they had to say is as simple a matter as
that. So I joined Conoco then in September of 69.
OK. And what was your starting position? Did you
have a title? I like a title. Everyone has like a
title.
I was on the oil side of Conoco, and that was a
marketing training. Okay. So how long have you
been with Conoco and Vista? 20 years. Oh, a long
time. 69 double. And so now you're senior vice
president. And so how did you get to that position,
besides lots of hard work? Well, I mean, that's
probably it, isn't it? Sure. I mean, lots of hard
work and lots of opportunity presented. to me and
lots of support from a lot of other people. Well, do
you think that it's important for, say, my
generation and the ones that follow to know about
Vietnam and what happened there and why? Sure,
absolutely.
Why do you think it's important for them to know?
Well, I think it's only important
in the same context as that all major events in our
history are important for all people, including
people of your generation, to know about.
Certainly the events of the 60s and the early 70s
set into place, set into motion, a lot of things in
this country and our feeling about warfare is only
one of those, but that's it. That's it. And we are
dealing with societal problems today that are
still emanating from people. So understanding
what Vietnam was about would be as important in
trying to understand those.
We have, you know, a number of people who are
veterans of Vietnam who are claiming all kinds of
psychological and physiological problems
related to the service in Vietnam. And if you're
going to have those people out claiming that,
well, then you ought to have some recognition of
what was that all about. I think there's probably
been a lot of increased awareness because of the
movies that have been out lately, like Fourth of
July. That appeals to a lot of the younger
generation. Yeah, those people. Those people, I
mean, the people that were, I mean, the very
obvious cases were people who made enormous
sacrifices. And
for them to have made that sacrifice and to be part
of our society, society needs to understand what
their role was and what they did. And it must be
difficult, extremely difficult for those
people.
to know in their heart is that what they did at the
time, they may or may not have thought was the right
thing. To know that after some period of time,
society no longer supported it. And now, you know,
I am suggesting is that history has proven it
probably didn't matter a whole great deal, as it
turns out. It only happened, it was only important
because that's what it was important to support
the activities of the country at that time, and we
must have a citizenry which is willing to do that.
Well, have you ever gone back to Vietnam? No, I
haven't. Do you think you ever would? Oh, yes. I
have a file right over here I can show you. As soon as
I can go back with State Department sanction, I'll
go. Wow. My prof, I asked him the same question, and
he said he visits Vietnam. Does he? and some of the
other Southeast Asian countries, like Cambodia
and Laos. And I asked him how the people responded
to him, and he said that they were just great. Well,
I'd like to talk to him about how he does it. I mean,
quite seriously, I'd like to get his name and his
telephone number, if I might, and talk to him about
that. Because the extent to which I've
investigated it, the problem is on getting a visa.
First of all, you cannot get a visa in this country.
So what one has to do is to go to some place like
Bangkok and then apply for a visa. And it's a very
uncertain process. It takes a lot of time. And I
don't really have the time to go to Bangkok and then
wait around for a week or two until I get a visa. But I
might like to talk to him and see. Maybe he's got an
entree that I don't understand. I'm sure he can
help. Okay, I will. I guess my final question is,
have you ever been to Washington to see the...
Veterans War Memorial. What was your impression
when you saw that? I'll tell you because part of it
is somewhat humorous. Most of it is not. But yes, I
did. I went to see it. I can't recall what year it was
now. It must have been dedicated in the early fall
of about 1984 or 5. Does that sound right? Sometime
around that. Maybe a little later. At any case, I
was in Washington, D.C. for a meeting that takes
place in October of every year, so I know when I was
in Washington anyway, and went to see the
memorial. And it had only been open at that time for
a few weeks, and it was kind of a rainy, cold day. And
I went down, and the ground around the memorial,
they put sod down, but it wasn't very well put down.
It was very muddied around there in the end.
virtually had to walk on what looked like packing
crates, or these skids you put underneath for
forklifts to pick up. And he kind of walked across
that to get to it. And I thought that was very
appropriate for Vietnam. It kind of had this
construction site look in the mud. So that was one
thing. But once I got to the wall, then it became a
very emotional experience. Not extremely
emotional, but a bit emotional. And I have been
back. probably since I do go to Washington quite a
bit, I've been back to it probably three or four
more times since then, once with my family. And
it's always with some emotion. And I particularly
like also the statue that's at the end of it. I think
it's very lifelike. Have you seen it? No, but I've
been told about it. Yeah, I think you really should
see it. I would love to. It's very lifelike, and
it's very... representative, in fact, of the type
of gear that soldiers wore in Vietnam. I mean, you
know, down to the way they tied their boots and the
way their pants are bloused out over the boots and a
towel around one guy's neck and so forth. And you
walk around behind the equipment, it's very
authentic looking. So I thought it was very well
done. And the facial expressions and so forth are
very good. That's very interesting. Well, are
there any closing comments you'd like to make? No,
not at all. Well, I thank you very much for this
interview. I'm sure it would be very enlightening
for someone else as it has been for me. Thank you.